# Co-Intelligence

> Ubuntu: I am, because you are[^1]

The cognitive scientist Abeba Birhane takes the south African humanist philosophy of *Ubuntu* as an argument against a western tradition of the *self* as autonomous beings.[^2] According to *Ubuntu* philosophy a person becomes a person, only through the relationships with others. The personality is shaped by the interactions with others and is fluidly shifting between different states. I am a different person, when talking to my mother, my friends and strangers on the street, at the same time my upbringing and cultural influences define my own self-image. Birhane traces back the flaws in western theories of the mind to René Descartes ‘cogito ergo sum’ – I think, therefore I am. In his famous meditation the French philosopher tried to strip back all things of uncertainty to  arrive at the foundation of inner thoughts as proof of existence. In turn this individualistic ‘I’ and the method of logical reasoning have become a successful story in western sciences. First, Cartesian Dualism, the idea of a separate mind and body and secondly the scientific method of breaking down complex natural phenomenons into smaller quantifiable parts. For more than 200 years scientists, philosophers and theologists stood in front of the ‘body-mind problem’, coming up with theories of how the immaterial ‘soul’ interacts with the fleshy human body: Why are we conscious of the world around us, ourselves and others? 

They concluded that the brain must do the thinking[^3] and using the scientific method the brain was separated into smaller parts until we could find and describe synapses and neurons. The groundwork was done by the mathematician Gottfried Wilhelm Leibniz, who proposed the existence of fundamental ‘Monads’ that transcend all matter in the universe, which function as an intermediary between mind and matter. Sir John Eccles applied this theory to the model of synaptic actions, that he developed through experimentation with electricity and the brain, and called the mysterious forces through which we control the brain ‘psychons’. This was not well received by materialists, for which the laws of physics must also apply to consciousness. Following this logic, consciousness becomes information embedded in the physical substrate of the brain. If we can only measure all physical activity in the brain, we can duplicate the experience of being human. Together with the metaphor that the brain is just a computer made of neurons, the dualist idea of software separated from hardware undermines its own position of explaining the uniqueness of human experience.

---
[^1]: The term Ubuntu originates from southern Africa and is used to describe a humanist philosophy according to which persons are interconnected. It is often used in phrases such as the Zulu ‘Umuntu ngumuntu ngabantu’, which translates to  ‘A person is a person through other persons’. The term for personhood (ubuntu) itself is not clearly defined and has different meanings in different areas. @gadeWhatUbuntuDifferent2012
[^2]: ^ @DescartesWasWrong
[^3]: In the story*On Having No Head* D.E. Harding describes the realization that one can never experience their own head, because the most important sensual organs are embedded in it. I don’t remember where I read it, but there is an argument that the reason we place consciousness in the brain is because we mostly experience the world from the position of our head.