This chapter started from an ancient story which told of mechanical servants to help their master Hephaestus. A myth of the dream to breathe life into objects, of which we have evolved to empathize with as this is our default behavior. I looked at the journey it took us to imitate and understand the vocal patterns we have created to communicate. Starting from von Kempelen’s and Faber’s attempts to build mechanical devices capable of creating basic phonemes, which eventually led to the successful synthesis of voices using electricity. Initially, these artificial voices were incorporated into toys that could react to children's speech. However, as technology advanced and computer programs became more sophisticated, artificial voices became more ubiquitous, interacting with everyone. Finally, I talked about the production of our own voice model and how we created a doll that acts as performer; albeit being remotely controlled

In this chapter, we explored the ancient myth of mechanical servants helping their master Hephaestus, which led to our innate desire to breathe life into objects. We traced the evolution of our ability to communicate through vocal patterns, from failed attempts by von Kempelen and Faber to create phonemes with mechanical devices, to the successful synthesis of voices using electricity. These artificial voices were initially used in toys that could react to children's speech but became more ubiquitous with advances in technology and computer programs. Finally, we discussed how we created a doll that can be remotely controlled and performs as a voice model. Overall, this chapter highlights our fascination with creating and interacting with artificial voices.